the composition of the Earth's core
remains a mystery scientists know that
the liquid outer core consists mainly of
iron and according to current models
small amounts of so-called light
elements possibly sulfur oxygen silicon
carbon or hydrogen oxygen is the most
abundant element in the planet so it's
reasonable to expect oxygen might be one
of the dominant light elements in the
core however new research from a team
including ging wei FEI of Carnegie's
geophysical laboratory shows that oxygen
does not have a major presence in the
outer core this has major implications
for our understanding of the period when
the earth formed through the accretion
of dust and clumps of matter scientists
can't sample the core directly so they
have to learn about it through improved
laboratory experiments combined with
modeling and seismic data
with increasing depth inside the earth
pressure and heat also increase and as a
result materials act differently than
they do on the surface
scientists know the variations in
density and speed of sound is a function
of depth in the core from seismic
observations but to date it has been
difficult to measure these properties
and proposed iron alloys at core
pressures and temperatures in the
laboratory they shock these materials to
the liquid state and measured the
density and speed of sound traveling
through them under conditions directly
comparable to those of the liquid outer
core by comparing their data with
observations they conclude that oxygen
cannot be a major light element
component of the Earth's outer core the
research revealed a powerful way to
decipher the identity of the light
elements in the core for the research
should focus on the potential presence
of elements such as silicon portions of
this work was supported by grants from
the national natural science foundation
of china the fundamental research funds
for the central universities the
national basic research program of china
as well as the National Science
Foundation and the Carnegie Institution
for science the research is published in
the November 24th issue of nature the
carnegie institution has had over 100
years of extraordinary discoveries to
continue this tradition carnegie
scientists need your support for more
information about this and other cool
science visit our website at carnegie
science edu this is john Strom